[Music]
great um thank you very much Tom for
that nice introduction I'd also like to
thank Ken Ford for the invitation uh to
come down here and uh and present a talk
on some of our uh recent work in
involving uh
cancer
um so I have the slide here cancer and
metabolic disease uh with metabolic
Solutions um having worked in the area
for some number of years it becomes
clear to me I think we have a
path uh to manage better this disease
than the path and the approaches that we
are currently
on um I start with I know you might not
be able to see these numbers clearly but
that's not that
important um these numbers are the what
I have here
is a question for you all to think about
but I've also broken down from the
American Cancer Society data on um
cancer statistics new cases deaths per
year and deaths per day and I have this
in my book and I keep adding every year
uh the a you know when when is this
going to change okay now um if you look
at the numbers they're quite sobering
okay uh but people look into these
numbers and see uh um significant uh
advance and the advance that they see is
that the number of deaths the increase
in debts per year is not this increase
is not as fast as the number of new
cases and based on that they say we're
winning the war on cancer um you know
I'm looking at this and I'm not going to
say you you can choose you can make the
decision now the other issue is of
course you know with with uh 1500 1,600
people a day dying from cancer people I
they know this is a problem but can you
imagine if we had 1500 people a day
dying from Ebola uh think of it would it
would lead to a national panic but yet
in cancer it it seems to be uh kind of I
don't know if you want to say it's
accepted or just this is the way it is
well I I I think there's a there has to
be a change here we're spending billions
of dollars on this disease and that the
the incidence continues to increase and
so do the deaths per day all right so so
what why is this okay what's going on
here and it's my view that we have
misunderstood what the nature of this
disease actually is and this is what I'd
like to focus on and I like to provide
you with data uh evidence to show
what we think the disease is and and and
and what and what the disease really is
so the provocative question is cancering
nuclear genetic disease or a metabolic
mitochondrial metabolic dise very
important because the answer to this
question will change the way we uh study
the disease and the way we uh try to
manage uh the
disease so uh what in in today the
academic and pharmaceutical Industries
view cancer as a genetic disease and
this is what we call the Dogma this is a
belief an unshakable belief is a dogma
and uh this paper Hallmarks of cancer
the Next Generation by uh hannahan and
Weinberg is one of the most highly cited
from their previous and their current
papers this is cited many many times
because this sets out the Dogma as
cancer is a genetic
disease and when I say it's a Dogma
because I teach biology at Boston
College and all the books on
biochemistry cell biology biology they
talk about cancer as a genetic disease
involved with enogen and tumor
suppressor genes and this kind of stuff
it's in all the textbooks our young
people are indoctrinated into thinking
and studying cancer as a genetic disease
it's the fundamental basis for the
pharmaceutical and academic Industries
in their grants and in their approaches
and things like this is that is that
right
though so and this is a textbook what we
show in the textbooks that you'll find
in in in college textbooks
they they they look at this as oh here's
a car the the the pedal is to the metal
and the the brakes are off okay so this
is basically a a situation where the
they're looking at these cells as being
completely disregulated because they
they can't stop growing so the the key
thing about cancer is this cell division
out of
control and then we look at the Proto
anog genes these are uh people have one
Noel prizes for this mutations in these
genes uh uh lead to various kinds you
get multiple copies mutations and
rearrangements and what it basically
does is it stimulates these cells to
grow faster and uncontrolled these these
enogen derived from Proto onogen tumor
suppressor genes prevent uh uh uh
prevent tumor tumorogenesis so here's a
normal tumor suppressor Gene it produces
a product that keeps these cells in
check you can see they're they have
appearance of not growing too fast but
if you have a mutation in that
suppressor Gene then all of a sudden
these cells start to you don't have a
control over them and the and the
signature feature is uncontrolled cell
growth so it's a
combination uh according to the Dogma
It's a combination of here's a normal
cell and you and you have normal
chromosomes and on those chromosomes are
genes and then all of a sudden pop you
get a sematic mutation here a sematic
mutation there you get a few more
sematic mutations and all of a sudden
the cell becomes a malignant cell and
then you have to use all kinds of
treatments and this person you know uh
is is one is an individual now part of
the part of the system uh involved in
personalized therapies because she's
looking at a at a a readout of the gene
mutations in this person's breast tumor
and they're going to make a a
therapeutic decision by by looking at
all these different kinds of mutations
and then they're going to say okay I can
if we use this drug or that drug or this
approach or that approach we may be able
to Target one of these different kinds
of mutations and then maybe we'll be
able to uh you know provide some sort of
a therapy problem is every cell in the
tumor is a different genetic entity
thousands and thousands of mutations no
tumor it's just a it's a big hodgepodge
from the The genome projects and then
this one is it's bad
luck sorry it's bad luck and that paper
just came out in science last month okay
from the vulin group at at John's
Hopkins it's almost like a fat of
complete it's like uh you know what you
oh well you just have bad luck and
you're going to have these mutations
you're going to get cancer and then
they're going to try to treat you for
this stuff so so we have this and this
is where it is this is the this is where
it is today all major medical schools
are
building Departments of personalized
medicine so we can screen all the
mutations in the tumor cells to develop
very expensive drugs that often don't
work very well and can harm you but yet
we're going forward with immunotherapies
all this kind of
stuff evidence the challenges the
sematic mutate what you mean to tell me
there's no EV everybody is bought on to
this Dogma okay why no one challenges
why why why no one talks about the
articles that don't support that let me
show you some examples okay this is a
paper published in a top Journal science
in 1969 from mckinnel group it's a a
tumor in a frog it has a renal kidney
tumor and and the frogs are good because
we can do a lot of nice developmental
studies on them because we before we
clone Dolly the sheep they did a lot of
this work in frogs so what mckinnel did
was to ask you know what what is the the
nucleus of the tumor cell doing and in
controlling the the growth of the tumor
so here's they take the tumor out you
take the cell out of the tumor and you
take the nucleus out of the tumor cell
and you put it into a new cell of a
fertilized egg so this is a new frog
fertilized egg except the original
nucleus was removed and the nucleus from
the tumor cell was placed into that egg
and you got a tadpole and this tadpole
looked perfectly normal there was
nothing wrong with this tadpole what
happened to the enco jees and tumor
suppressor genes that were supposed to
be responsible for the disregulated cell
growth we don't know but what's
interesting is the tadpole didn't grow
it didn't develop into a mature frog the
new the mutations or whatever the defs
were in that nucleus prevented further
development so there was an abortion or
a abreg a blockage of further
development now this was a study done by
in another powerful Journal pnas by uh
beatric mince uh who was one of the the
leaders in mamalian developmental
biology and she cloned ice from the
nuclei of teratoma cells and her
conclusions were it's not possible that
somatic mutations can be responsible you
got a mouse cloned from the nucleus of a
tumor cell if the nuclear sematic
mutations are causing the disregulated
growth how is it possible that you can
cont that you can develop a mouse or
clone a mouse from the nucleus of a
tumor cell something is wrong here and
she said it's it can't structural
mutations in the genome can't explain
this if you want to learn how to imp
mement the ketogenic diet and the Press
pulse protocol into your cancer
management just visit
school.com keto for cancer the new
community by our research analyst Johnny
rocker within this new community
platform you can connect with other
patients and learn from their
experiences you can also just search
through the posts other members have
already made you will have access to our
classroom section as well which provides
practical advice and tools for the best
results these section cover all parts of
the press pulse protocol that you should
Implement starting with the general
scientific concepts by Dr Thomas cyh we
will show you how to start the ketogenic
diet including which foods to choose and
which to avoid additionally we prepared
a list of doctors specialized in
metabolic therapy as well as details
about glutamine inhibition and
hyperbaric oxygen
protocols so take a look around at
school.com keeto for cancer
this was a more recent paper by Jim
Morgan's group at St Jude's they cloned
a mouse from the nucleus of a brain
tumor all right this was a medul
blastoma and they implanted it into an
embryonic stem cell and this is the
mouse embryo you can see it here but the
germ layers maderm ectoderm endoderm are
all in their ordered uh places there's
no abnormal growth okay but the only
problem is the embryos would only go to
a certain point and then abort
there was something these abnormalities
in the nucleus of the tumor cell they
were not causing tumors they were
aborting development okay so you have to
go back and say what is the hmark
feature of cancer disregulated
disordered growth driven by enogen and
tumor suppressor genes we're not seeing
that when we do these kinds of studies
and always people always say oh these
are Auto these are you know U exceptions
exceptions exceptions well Rudy yish
found the same kind of an exception he
cloned Mice from the new nuclei of
melanoma cells and he was he wanted to
make sure his group wanted to make sure
how is it possible what happens to all
these mutations that are in the nucleus
of the melanoma cell did they go away so
he takes the nucleus and puts it into a
stem cell and clones this mouse and he
looks at the mouse and finds the same
genetic mutations in this mouse that was
present in the in the in the melanoma
but the this doesn't have the tumors so
again we're seeing this over and over
and then a more recent paper came out
and showed that if you transfer
mitochondria non-cancerous mitochondria
the mitochondria I'll talk about in a
minute these are the little organel
inside the cell that generate the energy
in our body okay but you can you can
completely shift the tumorogenic the
cancer phenotype by moving these
mitochondri around regardless of what
kind of nucleus is in there whether it's
a tumorogenic or a non- tumorogenic
nucleus these findings are incompatible
with sematic mutation theory of cancer
so what what we did then is we I now I
only gave you a snapshot of of many many
many studies that I pulled together for
the first time and when you see these
data for the first time one after
another after another you say to
yourself what is going on here do the
people who run the genome projects know
about this often times they ignore it
they don't discuss
this now what now here it is okay normal
cells beget normal cells tumor cells in
red beget tumor cells what is
responsible for this disregulated cell
growth is it the mutations in the
nucleus as the Dogma would state or is
it something to do with abnormalities in
the mitochondria in the cytoplasm those
little bean-shaped organel because
they're abnormal also in the tumor cell
these tumor cells don't have normal
energy metabolism so red cells tumor
cells beget tumor cells so when you do
the experiments and you move the nucleus
of the tumor cell and now put it into a
normal cytoplasm you get normal cells
you get sometimes normal tissue and as I
showed you you can sometimes develop a
whole mouse or a frog from the nucleus
of the tumor cell which is supposed to
contain the mutations that drive the
disease and we don't see that and if you
take the nucleus out of a normal cell
and put it into a tumor cell cytoplasm
you either get dead cells or tumor cells
there's something going on here what's
happening is that the the normal
mitochondria can suppress the formation
of tumors and whatever the gene
mutations happen to be they're not the
drivers of this disease
yet we're spending we're focusing on
that so if the somatic mutations are not
the origin of cancer where does cancer
come from how do we get
cancer warberg had a pegged a long time
ago in Germany one of the leading
biochemists of the 20th century warberg
said cancer arises from damage to
cellular respiration all right we
breathe in air we exhale this is our
respiration our cells we respire we are
a respire we respire get our energy from
oxygen and we burn fuels cancer cells
have defects in respiration and then if
they have the defect in respiration they
must compensate some way and they
ferment energy through fermentation
gradually compensates for insufficient
respiration fermentation is a primitive
energy source that existed before oxygen
came on the planet cells continue to
ferment lactic acid in the presence of
oxygen normal cell if you hold your
breath your cells begin to ferment
you breathe and then you remove you
build up lactic acid you get rid of the
lactic acid you exercise a lot you can
build up the cancer cells continue to
produce lactic acid even though there's
oxygen present something's wrong here
there's a problem in their respiration
enhanced fermentation is the sign
signature metabolic malady of all cancer
cells now I showed you that picture of
that woman looking at the screen looking
at the hundreds of mutations every
Cancer cell has different kinds of
mutations but they all ferment that's
the that's what they do they ferment why
we not focus on their abnormality that's
common to all the cells rather than
focusing on the defects that's present
only in a few of them those are the
questions people have to ask now
cellular energy metabolism and this is a
very simplistic diagram I don't want to
get into all the pathways most of the
energy we have in our body comes from
oxidative phosphorilation by breathing
oxygen through the electron transport
chain in the mitochondria of our
cells now we get a little bit of energy
in glycolysis and the cytoplasm and a
little bit of energy in this KB cycle
cancer cells have less energy coming
from oxidative phosphorilation and more
energy coming from these more primitive
forms of energy this is the difference
between the cancer cell and the normal
cell the common difference that we see
not the mutations but this is the common
difference now here's an ex here's a
visual example of what I'm talking about
mitochondrial morphology a little
bean-shaped organel in the cytoplasm is
the energy source of our cells the power
plants in our cells of these little
mitochondria they they're laced
throughout the cytoplasm in our cell and
then these little Stripes you see these
little Stripes these bands they are
called chiste and in those little bands
contain the proteins and the lipids
necessary for us to breathe and for our
energy and our bodies to work here's a a
mitochondria and a gleo blastoma
multiform it's a human very deadly human
brain tumor and you can see it's empty
inside it's called chrisis there's
breakdown of christe so the the the
mitoch in cancer cells have defects in
the very structures needed for them to
respire there's no way that this organel
is going to be able to use oxygen
efficiently to produce energy so
therefore the cell to survive must
ferment and that's what these cancer
cells are doing they're all fermenters
to one degree or
another now Pete Peterson at Johns
Hopkins published a beautiful paper in
1978 documenting that there is no known
tumor cell that doesn't have some defect
however small in the in the structure
through these little
organel So based on that information and
based on the information that I'm going
to show you about how to manage some of
these diseases we put together and I
know this is a little hard for the
people in the back to see and it tries
to encapsulate all of the observations
the majority of the observations that we
see in cancer based on a metabolic
underpin okay this is what we're trying
to do we're trying to show that if your
hypothesis or your theory is correct you
should be a able to account and explain
the vast changes that we see in the
disease and we can first of all we have
this oncogenic Paradox which has P
puzzled everyone from the beginning the
the great minds and the thinkers how is
it possible that we could have so many
provocative agents in the environment
that we know cause cancer cause the
disease through a common mechanism all
right so for example I mean we we have
um carcinogens you know we have
radiation hypoxia inflammation rare
inherited mutations people think cancer
must be a genetic disease because I got
I inherited a gene from my mother or my
father and gave me cancer that Gene
product Targets this this little organel
the mitochondria and makes it
inefficient so that is the primary cause
is the damage to this organal all of
these different provocative agents will
do that viruses people know hepatitis C
papiloma viruses they cause cancer they
cause cancer because they disrupt the
energy metabolism in that organel and
age we get older older people are prone
to cancer than younger people because
that organel gets damaged with age now
what happens is when that organel is
damaged it produces these reactive
oxygen species a toxic byproducts of
energy metabolism and these Ross are
both carcinogenic and mutogenic they
will damage the DNA in the nucleus and
they will further damage the energy
metabolism in the in the mitochondria so
these little rths are produced from this
plethora of disperate some people say
well I don't know how I got cancer I did
this I did that I was you know it could
be from any one of these things damaging
that producing these rust the rust then
damag the DNA and the so all the
mutations and broken that chromosomes
and all these things that we see and
that we're studying and we're spending
billions of dollars on are Downstream
epiphenomena of the damage to the
respiration now what happens here is we
have normal respiration and we have this
old fermentation pathway and as warberg
said as the respiration becomes damaged
from a chronic inflammatory from smoking
from carcinogens or whatever respiration
in the cell goes down and the cell to
survive must be begin the fermentation
the red line goes up the cells are
compensating their respiration for the
Primitive form of energy that existed on
the planet before oxygen came in which
is fermentation now what's driving this
the
enogen these things that we're all
focusing on they are the mitochondria
signal the nucleus we are insufficient
with respiration we're going to die if
we don't get help so what happens is the
signals go to the nucleus enogen turn on
the enogen are transcription factors
that increase fermentation energy
Pathways all right so this is an effect
it's a knee-jerk response to the damage
of that organel now you go back and you
begin to put all the pieces of the whole
marks of cancer together linked to the
damage to that one organel and you can
do that I've done it and it's very
remarkable how you can count for all of
the thousands of studies that are being
done on cancer can all be linked back to
this one common factor which is damage
to the respiration so we've seen
angiogenesis avoidance of apotosis AP
Tois if a cancer cell has defective
respiration it should be dead and that's
what happens as warberg said if you
damage the respiration too acutely the
cell dies it can never become a cancer
cell but what we have here is we have
avoidance of apotosis and then you have
this metastatic issue where we have
shown M the B our immune cells of our
body Fus with these tumor cells and you
have metastasis because these cells
naturally spread throughout the body
published several papers on that so if
all cancers are a type of mitochondrial
metabolic disease then what therapies
might be effective for managing the
tumors calorie restriction is what
brought us to the idea that you know
what's going on here a metabolic cancer
intervention it involves total dietary
restriction differs from starvation
people say oh Caffrey does starvation
studies no I don't kahill did starvation
studies T Hill used he's the world
expert he was before he when was alive
calorie restriction is very therapeutic
you don't starve to death people some
people say oh I haven't eaten for three
days I'm starving to death you're not
starving to death you have to go but my
students tell me I said how long you
going to go before how how long you
think you're going to live without
eating oh two days so I I I said you're
going to be dead in two days if you
don't
eat oh maybe I may think about that a
little bit
more I'm I feel like I'm going to be
dead so so anyway it maintains middle
and Newtons enhance enhances mitochondri
is another thing if you stop eating the
mitochondria they go through the
autophagy procedure the mitochondria get
broken down this mitochondria is not
working get rid of him put put him in
the lome re reconfigure his his
metabolites and we're going to have new
and healthy mitochondria woo CR M now
don't forget now oh we do all this work
in the mice oh will it work in human
well when when you when the human finds
out what he has to do to make the to
make it look like he's the mouse I don't
want to do this so therapeutic fasting
what does that mean drink water for
three or four days maybe a week and then
I'll get the same benefit is this poor
Mouse now the the the thing of it is the
B basil metabolic rate of the mouse is
seven times faster than that of the
human it's unbelievable these guys eat
25% of their body weight a day you know
it's unbelievable humans are much more
capable of dealing with these metabolic
shifts than is the mouse now when we
stop eating blood sugar goes down for
the most part most of us obviously
you're not eating anything the brain
needs sugar the brain needs glucose oh
if we stop eating to days I should be
unconscious laying on the floor writhing
around well what happens how come I'm
not doing that because we have L insulin
goes down glucagon comes up and then you
start mobilizing the fats after a couple
of you know 36 hours get rid of the
glycogen and we take the fats and it
goes to the liver and the liver breaks
up like putting it's like putting long
logs of fatty acids into a wood chipper
outome these water soluble Ketone bodies
and they go to the brain and the Brain
will burn ketones and glucose so the
ketones take the pressure off the fact
that you're lowering blood sugar this is
an evolutionary evolutionarily conserved
adaptation to starvation otherwise we
would have been wiped out as a species
humans evolve to starve we can go long
periods I long conversations with K
about how long people can go without
eating and still be healthy starvation
is a pathological state it it it there's
a period when therapeutic fasting moves
to starvation which is pathological and
that's very dangerous so don't think
that you have to be very careful about
this beta hydroxy berate aceto these are
water soluble breakdown products of fat
and they are powerful energy metabolites
that will allow our body to function at
maximal energy efficent
but you only when the glucose goes down
now this is a diagram explaining a
little bit how this might work to kill
tumor cells or at least arrest their
disregulated proliferation so here we
have this cell here's a blood vessel
okay all of our tissues have blood
vessels through them okay glucose comes
into the cell and is metabolized through
the glycolytic pathway to perate and
it's fully oxidized but the tumor cell
as I told you this organel is defective
in the tumor cell so consequently the
glucose they they blow out lactic acid
they convert pyua this is a waste
product lactic acid it goes into the
outside of the cell and creates an
acidic micro environment this brings in
makes the immune system look oh
everybody the micro environment all
these cells are coming in secreting all
these different kinds of factors because
the cells can't effectively respire so
what we do is we lower the blood sugar
that's the fuel for this growing beast
and we bring in the ketones the ketones
are raised up they come into the cell
they bypass this they go right into into
the mitochondria problem tumor cells
have all these defects they can't use
the ketones the normal cells in the
brain are burning these ketones because
we evolved to do that the tumor cells
are stumbling staggering this is a fuel
they can't use because they're
mitochondria defective so what we do is
we metabolically marginalize these cells
it kills a lot of them but doesn't kill
them all but it slows the whole process
down and we we we we actually showed
here's an example of a mouse that has a
big tumor and we just take away the food
that he eats restrict his food by
40% and this is AD libidum means the
Mouse eats whatever he wants whenever he
wants you get and then we just
restricted this and you can see we got
anywhere from a 65 to 85% reduction in
the size of the tumor simply by taking
away reducing the amount of food and we
also went on to show each little square
is a mouse under a different diet
condition as glucose goes down ketones
go up this is an evolutionary conserved
response to the absence of glucose as
glucose goes down the tumor size goes
down
we we were one of the first to show this
and many people now have shown this in
all kinds of humans with different kinds
of cancers brain cancer linked to blood
sugar it doesn't mean that Sugar causes
the cancer but if you have the tumor the
tumor will grow faster with the higher
blood sugar the higher your sugar the
faster that tumor is going to grow
because it's going to ferment the sugar
Prime fuel for
fermentation tumor what are the now
people say what's the mechanism what's
the mechanis you got to show the
mechanism we showed the mechanism okay
anti-angiogenic we showed insulin like
growth factor signaling Cascades go down
akt signaling goes down we showed all
this stuff anti-inflammatory these drugs
in the pharmaceutical industry
anti-angiogenic anti-inflammatory
molecules are big business nothing is as
powerful as this calorie restriction in
targeting those Pathways NF Capa B
pathway also proapototic if you're going
to kill your tumor cells you want to
make sure you're killing only your tumor
cells and not the cells surrounding it
all right and that you want them to die
by their own self self suicide apotosis
you want to kill them by this tumor cell
droing dead you don't want to blast the
whole environment and kill everybody
along with the tumor cell this calorie
restriction and ketogenic diet
restrictions kill these cells through a
proapototic mechanism which is really
nice star contrast to standards of care
research question okay what about GBM we
do a lot of work with brain tumors we
build some of the finest and best models
of brain cancer that replicate exactly
what goes on in the human brain and
here's an example of one of these models
so this is a this dark blue material
here those are the tumor cells and you
put a few cells into this Mouse's brain
and it migrates from one side of the
brain to the other and goes to different
regions very quickly just like GBM does
the human GBM we put the mouse under
calorie restriction and and you can see
we don't kill the tumor completely but
we restrict a lot of its if its Invasion
and Mig migratory Behavior very
interesting now the problem with calorie
restriction is it's calorie restriction
the name itself people have cancer
they're under a lot of mental stress
they're in duress and now you tell the
poor guy well you're going to have have
to stop eating for like 3 weeks he
doesn't want to hear that okay so so
what we do is we can we can achieve the
same kinds of metabolic manipulation
with these ketogenic
diets now what is a ketogenic diet a lot
of controversy oh this ketogenic diet
what is a ketogenic diet well basically
and this they come in all sizes and
shapes and you got to be careful okay so
it's basically a low carbohydrate diet
high fat a moderate protein gets a lot
of energy per gram of food ketogenic
diets un view should always be consumed
in restricted amounts anyway but you
know the interesting thing the human
brain if you eat fat you feel full all
right A lot of people eat the oh I've
had enough some sometimes it's not
always as tasty as you like it to be and
you just don't want to eat anymore
because it doesn't taste good but the
issue is and you get indirect calorie
restriction like that but the issue is
uh there's hormones in our brain and our
body that respond to this that give us a
natural restriction of food now people
say uh here's here's a mouse tumor and a
human tumor to be compared paed uh with
growth under the calorie restricted
ketogenic diet now here's the
unrestricted high carb diet now here's a
ketogenic diet where the mouse is not
restricted he eats as much as he wants
there's no change in the tumor either
the mouse tumor or the human human tumor
it is only when we restrict the diet do
we see the the reduction in tumor size
now this is very important blood glucose
and blood ketones people say oh you're
eating a diet that has no carbohydrates
in it you know 1 or 2% sometimes zero
how is it possible that you're
maintaining containing high blood sugar
when you're eating a diet that has no
carbohydrates in it where's the sugar
coming from it's coming from the liver
if you eat too much fat you get
dyslipidemia insulin insensitivity and
the blood sugar stays High you got to
cut this down a little bit then once the
blood sugar goes down the ketones go up
now look at here's the guy eating all
the ketogenic want are you getting
ketones from this yes he's getting
ketones they're higher but he's peeing
them out as fast as he's making them
he's peeing them out but if you restrict
the diet now they stay in the
bloodstream and they stay much higher
concentrations and the important issue
here is that ketones if you can get them
high enough they will absolutely kill
the tumor cells Dom datino and I showed
this and so to several others they act
as histone deacetylase Inhibitors this
is very interesting because the
pharmaceutical industry has a big
platform on developing histone deyas
drugs to kill tumor cells they're very
toxic and expensive you can do the same
thing if you can get your ketones high
enough but you got to lower that blood
sugar now here's the plan you get your
blood sugar down you get your ketones up
and you get into this so-called zone of
metabolic management and we're trying to
achieve that now this is a very
interesting picture of a dog with a big
tumor on his face now some woman from
Georgia uh read our papers on our looked
at our videos and YouTubes and she she
had this big dog and it had this big
Mass cell tumor on his face here's his
nose and here's the tumor and and she
said I did what you said I I fed my dog
uh she G went to the butcher got organic
chicken with the bone still in the meat
and she get a little uh medium chain
triglyceride oil a little raw egg and
she calculated the size of her dog how
many calories the dog should eat what
should I do to restrict the the the 40%
calories and uh she she gave the dog
that and and and and within a very short
period of time you can see the dates
here this tumor Shrunk the vet the vet
said that you're going to have to have
surgery radiation and chemo and it's
going to be expensive and the dog may
leave only six
months so she did this on her own
without any training and look here's
April 20 here's April 2014 and then she
sent me the picture last last month 25th
January 2015 how's the dog doing doing
fine I mean the dog he should have been
dead right so anyway some vets came to
my lab up at the tough New England
veterinary school they had come to me a
couple of years ago and they said Hey
listen we want to try ketogenic diets on
the dogs oh it's going to be tough you
know they're saying to me I I told them
what they have to do we have to bring
the dogs into the clinic do all this
stuff so I showed her I said well listen
here's something that might work you
might guys might want to consider so I
showed her this the the Vets up at the
tops and they said W this is really
interesting but we can't use this kind
of therapy in our clinic' and I said
'why and she said we don't believe in
feeding dogs raw
meat I said
what I said the damn dog evolved to eat
what do you think they were eating
Kibbles and bits in the
forest you
know I mean this is we're up against a
mindset here when you when you take your
brain and you put it into a different
sphere you can't see what goes on up or
down so but there are people who are
aware of this and they're going to start
moving on it because I think if we can
cure if we can manage these dogs cancer
some some guy may come to me can you do
that to me you know so mean we're up
against all kinds you have no idea all
the all the firewalls that exist can a
ketogenic diet be affect man in in in
patients what about people okay Linda
nebling now at the NIH she took two
little girls hopeless cases they were
really in bad sheep you got to read if
you read the article you'd be shocked at
these po what they did to these little
kids poison the to the toxic drugs the
kids gave them it's just sick it makes
you cry when you read it they were
radiated they were surgically mutilated
they were all kinds of things and then
she grabbed them put them on this
ketogenic diet and their quality of life
came back they they they started to
interact with their friends they went
back to school now they didn't survive
at least we don't one was lost to follow
up one lived much longer than than was
expected but their quality of life
increased dramatically when they were
put on the ketogenic diet and she
lowered the blood sugar and she elevated
the ketones just as we did for the dog
and these mice and the kids got the same
kind of an effect everybody oh it's doal
you had to run a clinical trial and
stuff but but I'm telling you we've seen
this in across the species so so anyway
we we we we designed a a protocol now we
first had to characterize yes she has
GBM path pathological report now here's
the big tumor um in the brain it's a
multicentric gasto these are the worst
of the worst kind I mean these tumors
are really nasty and uh you know we we
we we got this and then as soon as she
came out of surgery uh we uh she went on
a ketogenic diet calorie restricted
therapeutic fast water only all this
kind of stuff we were able to bring her
blood sugars down or ketones up a little
bit and then we had an MRI several
months after all this now she was
getting radiation and she was getting
chemo so not not not Tim isol mind she
was off the steroids she was getting
radiation but we have here a tumor
several uh months later and we call this
radiological resolution you don't see
any tumor in her brain anymore and
everybody was like shocked not that it
doesn't happen it happens very very
rarely and maybe maybe she's one of
those rare cases but we had several more
like this over periods of months and it
looked like everything was good so she
she was swimming in the medit she felt
good her quality of life was excellent
she gets off the diet and then about two
or three months later the the tumor
comes back and rather than going back on
the metabolic therapy she decides to go
on a vaston which is a big Blockbuster
drug in the pharmace pharmaceutical
companies I said don't use that I I've
looked into vaston it's the worst of the
worst drug never Ed it the FDA pulled it
off the market for breast cancer but
they haven't pulled it off for for brain
uh the C the tumor came back and she
died so we learned a lot from this and
we learned what we should do then I said
to myself what's going on with the
standard of care so what do we do to
people that have brain tumors all right
so uh I published the paper and I was
just so pissed off and I never thought
anybody would accept this paper for
publication but the lanc oncology one of
the top cancer journals did publish it I
was I was shocked actually so so anyway
I we draw this cartoon my students and I
so what here's you have this this big
tumor and then the surgeon will come in
he'll try to reect as much as he can and
then what happens is he can't get it all
and then they irradiate the remainder
and they cause the breakdown of all
these uh metabolites glutamine as I said
is a powerful fuel for these tumor cells
and it comes as the result of creating
this necrotic environment inside the
brain and then then your head swells
when you get radiation right so you get
you get dexamethasone you get a lot of
dexamethasone because you got a lot of
edema in the brain not only from the
tumor but from the radiation and all
this other stuff and this brings in
glucose high levels of glucose so the
two prime fuels that these tumor cells
need to survive are provided by the
standard of care and not only that they
give it temol amide which even incre
increases more of the necrosis and
inflammation and to make matters worse
these cells are all infected most of
them not all of them with human cyto
megala virus which use glucose and
glutamine and feed it into the met the
Machinery of the tumor cell this is the
perfect storm of adverse effects
knowing what I know I would never do
this to anybody this is the standard of
care now you want to see how it works
okay let's look at the survival of
standard of care and this is the the the
surviv okay so if you just take
radiation by itself in this big trial
nobody survived there wasn't a single
zero now what here's a big breakthrough
temis olomide used with radio therapy
gave us the first major advance in
survival in brain cancer I was at the
the talk when they mentioned oh this is
the greatest thing you can take it as a
pill form you don't have to be injected
with it and all this kind of stuff and
we get a little bit of an increase in
survival you can see radiotherapy with
this is a major Advance right here so
now what came out recently is a paper
temis alomide increases driver mutations
in the tumor tissue I said what's this
okay so driver I just went through this
big thing about cancer all the driver
genes and everybody thinks this is
what's causing the cancer now what's
going on here is you you give a drug
cholom increases these so-called bad
mutations that make it grow faster
should but yet the people live a little
longer how do you explain this on the
gene Theory here's the gene Theory it's
telling me if I have all these mutations
unle genes and tumor suppressor genes
driver genes why the patients are living
longer when you're give them a drug that
increases these
mutations all right so what I said look
what happens when a patient takes Taz
olomide I gave it to some of my mice it
was like the worst thing I could ever
imagine look at the mouse he's like dead
in three days he's starving to death and
everything I said what's going on so so
I I take this I said look at the what
are the patients they get fatigue nausea
diarrhea
vomiting all of these things are
secondary forms of calorie
restriction do you think it's possible
that this little blip in survival might
be due to an independent effect rather
than what they think it's doing now who
is going to run a clinical trial to test
that
hypothesis so we we've abandoned our
thinking along those lines we've come up
with this concept of the press pulse
Paradigm which I think and Dom and a
bunch of us think is going to going to
be a
more a more rational way to deal with
this cancer now will it work I think so
but it needs to be proven now what we're
going to do is we have these cells in
our body that are tumor cells and they
are filled with mutations no denying
that we have done listen there's plenty
of when we take our body and we fast and
we go through these different scenarios
our cells earn the right to live in this
body because we evolved over millions of
years from these other organisms we are
tough our normal cells can make these
metabolic transitions because our
genomes are are were were evolved to do
that these tumor cells are loaded with
mutations when you do that they you have
all these mutations you saw how they
block development well they're going to
block the transition from going from one
one state to another and we think this
is the way we're going to be able to
manage this we use a ketogenic diet in s
to form a total press on the body a mild
metabolic stress that puts these tumor
cells makes them vulnerable then we come
in with non-toxic drugs and we hit them
we hit them we hit them this way we hit
them that way we hit them this way as
long as they're under the press and we
think we can do this non- toxically to
keep people alive because we've shown it
in the mice when we combine certain
drugs with the diet we get Synergy the
diet is the press the pulse is the drug
non-toxic drug Dom dagostino and his
group we published this showing systemic
metastatic cancer the blue is all these
tumor cells that are lit up they're blue
all over the mouse because they're
spreading just like human metastatic
cancer hyperbaric oxygen does a little
bit the diet does of course has some
significant effect but when you combine
the two together you get Synergy
non-toxic Synergy we just don't know all
the right ways to do this yet or the
dosage is the or the or the best way in
what state you have to be in but we
think we can Perfect all that this is
another inting 25% of all cancer deaths
come from metastasis from some organ to
the brain okay so we have the headsight
so we have this model you put the cells
in the flank and you see the the tumor
cells go to the mouse's brain and the
mice this is just like human we put them
on these calorie restricted ketogenic
diets and we significantly reduce the
spread of the tumor from an organ to the
brain so we're able to show you do how
to do this now the problem is I'll just
briefly mention this people don't know
if you have cancer you don't know when
you're in this metabolic Zone how are
you going to do if you run a clinical
trial how do we know this so we my
students and I developed the glucose
Ketone index it's it's ridiculously
simple you just divide glucose by the
millimolar and Mill you come up with a
number and what we found is the closer
that number is to one or below 1.0
you're in this metabolic Zone that's
putting a lot of pressure on these tumor
cells okay this gives the patient an
opportunity to look at where he stands
today it's like somebody with who has
diabetes they look at them oh look at my
blood sugar is a little high but it
takes some insulin or but Tak some
metformin or something like this you can
you can patients now and their
caregivers can now administer these
kinds of uh of they can use this as a
tool to assess their therapeutic
efficacy
are you passionate about the
groundbreaking and heroic research of Dr
Thomas cyh on metabolic therapy and
cancer so are we that's why we've
created something special for you in
collaboration with Johnny rocker a
German book publisher and
translator introducing our collection of
meticulously crafted books that distill
the essence of Dr sa Reed's work dive
into the science and discoveries these
summary books are your gateway to
understanding the intricate world of
metabolic ketogenic therapy in a clear
concise and engaging way whether you're
new to the subject or a seasoned
Enthusiast our books offer insights that
can change your life ready to explore
this transformative knowledge visit our
website at www cancer as a metabolic
disease.com to get your copy you can buy
the ebook there directly and the
paperbook via the provided links here's
the best part a portion of every
purchase goes directly to support Dr
Thomas safe Reed's groundbreaking
research that's why the direct ebook
purchase is the best option to donate as
much as possible you can see all of the
donations Mr rocker has already made at
wwwo for
cancer.net that's right when you buy our
books you're not just investing in your
own knowledge you're also contributing
to the future of cancer research help us
make a
difference together we can drive change
and save
lives now what I did is I edited a big
uh series of Publications uh on ketones
not only for brain cancer we're now
realizing that these ketones have
tremendous power to manage a number of
chronic diseases like Alzheimer's
disease Parkinson's disease traumatic
brain injury they reduce inflammation
they provide an alternative fuel to the
brain and suppress a lot of the damaging
events that occur through aging or or
chronic trauma or or acute trauma and I
if if you're interested we're putting
this together now the academicians are
starting to take notice of what's going
on a lot of this is in my book on cancer
as a metabolic disease I also want to
bring your attention to the book that
Travis wrote uh he Travis couldn't
believe what I was saying in my book he
said I can't believe this so he said I
have to go out and talk to those
geneticists and those scientists at
these big universities and find out what
what do they think about all this and
and he came away with the he said these
guys are these guys are lost these guys
who doing these genomic studies they can
say everything can be anything and its
opposite there's no Rhyme or Reason to
any of this stuff yet we're plowing
ahead with billions of dollars so he
wrote a book for the lay person more or
less like like a journalist going around
getting personal he wants to talk to the
scientists that did the work or how they
feel about it comes out very interesting
so in conclusion pre-clinical and case
report studies indicate that the
restricted ketogenic diet Can Be an
Effective non-toxic metabolic for for
children and adults and that this
therapeutic can be enhanced if we
combine it with the Press pulse Paradigm
the these are non-toxic approaches I
can't tell you whether it's going to be
the solution to the cancer problem but I
can tell you I think it works and it's
not going to hurt you and it has the
potential mechanistically to be very
effective now a lot of my collaborators
at different universities a lot of
Physicians and basic researchers uh dam
is here you know Joe maroon at
Pittsburgh team surgeon for the
Pittsburgh Steelers I mean we have we
have a number of people that are are
gathering together that are basically
outraged about this cancer situation and
they want to do something about it and I
want to thank you for
[Music]
attention thank
you yes
questions if somebody currently has
cancer is there any kind of uh ketogenic
protocol or diet that they should follow
yes the question is do we have diets and
protocols and the answer is yes uh there
are a number of new books that have
appeared uh people the caregivers
themselves are writing these books and
they have a lot of firsthand experience
with themselves or with their own family
members and they work a lot of times uh
they'll work on the phone as a
consultation service and they'll get you
in touch with certain Physicians that
know how to apply this
unfortunately they're few and far
between you won't often find them at the
top medical schools unfortunately so
we're waiting for
the well we find them by the you you
consult the there was phone numbers and
I have lists of Physicians that I given
these packets that I hand out to the
because I have over 1,000 emails from
cancer patients and I I'm not a
physician I can't administer medicine I
can't do that but what I can do is put
these people in contact with those who
know how to do this and that's what I
try to do
yes thanks Ed uh doctor I sell Hammers
and I am a long long way from the
technicalities and the science you've
just described but to me listening to
you it's inarguable or unarguable could
you just for a moment switch feet and
give me some
arguments to disprove what you've said
to
me yeah um and that's the that's the the
uh assignment that I give to my
students because I said if we if the
students get an A if they can disprove
what I'm saying and they've been trying
for the last three
semesters so not that you can't because
there're people who have their whole
livelihood wrapped up into this Gene
Theory and you're not going to change
the mind of those people especially when
their salaries depend upon them not
believing
this all right there's a lot of
institution believe me what I say sounds
great and
wonderful but the devil is in the
details because this is a very difficult
thing but you know where it's going to
come from it's going to come from folks
like you it's going to come from the
people that the
consumer the consumer is going to want
it because you go to you go to mfet you
go to these other place you go to Dana
Farber you go to MD Anderson you go to
the Sloan ketering they're not going to
tell you what I told you but they don't
prove me
wrong so what's going on here all right
this is why it's a big it's going to be
a big big something's going to happen we
as I said to someone today we have two
choices we can status qu can do we can
go with the flow for the next 100 years
and get cancer drugs that it cost
$100,000 and the cost is passed on to
the to the Next Generation and you live
three or four extra months because don't
forget every month we have a new cure
for cancer it's in the Wall Street
Journal it's in Time
Magazine but I look at the numbers the
numbers are not changing now who well
how can you explain that oh it's coming
hope hope hope I look at it differently
I see something that can possibly work
and not hurt people oh they say the
ketogenic diet is is harmful to relative
to
what to
kolide give me a break yes thank
you you scared The Living Daylights out
of me with a vast and yeah I um had a
melanoma were in the
retina and it was too close to the line
of sight Vision so they did plaque
seating in 2009 in Boston at toughs
you and uh everything was great for
three years I came to Dr dooker is the
one and it came to five years I was
cancer free they said in your home but
in the past two years my eyesight has
been going down and and so I had a fluid
buildup and you uh just said a vastin so
a vason has been injected into my
eye uh now let me maybe about seven six
seven times Now to control the fluid and
you said it's the worst drug in the
world it's the worst drug for GBM gleo
blastoma multi foring and it was pulled
off the market for breast cancer however
there are certain situations like the
one you have where the therapies are
shown to be much better okay I gave it
to you from the GLE gleo blastoma and
the breast cancer angle okay and because
I have the data on that but I've also
seen there for some other indications it
seems to work better than some of these
invasive cancers so I I and thank you
for bringing that because I have to CL I
can clarify some of these these issues
but is it going to do more damage than
good it's I I can't be sure about that I
don't think anybody can be I'm just
saying for what for what the kinds of
cancers that it that it doesn't work
well for I can't I'm not going to say
it's because they they are in fact it is
approved for certain indications and it
does everybody does use it for those but
they use it for other indications which
I think the DAT is clearly argues
against them doing that is there a diet
that I could do that help that fluid get
rid of that flu well you know you can
talk to dog D dagostino and and some of
these other guys I mean none of these
diets are ever harmful to your body
they're only going to help you you know
I can't be sure you have to monitor all
this has to be monitored you like we
said is it going to help how do I know
well look at the pet scans look at the
look at the things that happen in your
body how do you feel you know most of
the people say hi you know how you doing
I you feel good you know that's there's
a lot to be said for feeling good you
know oh yeah maybe back
there sorry thank you for taking the
question um you specified the raw vegan
diet I is there some particular
rationale uh for using that diet well
only because I experienced it
myself and I spoke to patients oneon-one
a whole number of cancer patients
horrific stories I couldn't believe it
myself but I spoke to them and I
question them very carefully about it
it's over here in West Palm Beach the
hypocrates Health Institute you know
that raw vegan diet is pretty tough to
take you know you lose weight on it
you're chewing all day long like some
farm animal you know the the the the
aroma coming out of the kitchen from the
raw vegan you close the door you go the
other way you know but it works it works
on a lot of people but not everybody all
right I try doing it you know it's like
okay I only did it for three days but if
I did it for the three weeks like they
told me I'd come out probably a new
invol person
yeah
yes um probably as an over
simplification if you were to take say
the Atkins diet which is obviously uh
promoting ketosis how much different
ures is it basically just a whole lot
less food on the same basic principle or
is something different it's a little
different the question is the Atkins St
how does this differ because everybody
talks about the Atkins Atkins has too
much protein in it and the protein puts
puts a lot of pressure on your kidneys
and it also can be used by the liver to
make glucose so we're we're because the
Atkins diet says eat all the the the
meat and just don't eat any carbs you
know that's not good measure your
measure your glucose Ketone index if
you're de near one I don't care what
kind of diet you're on if you're near
one your B those tumor cells are going
to be under pressure all right so people
say well can I you know you want to eat
a bangle you know eat one bangle a week
and that's all you eat a week you know
then you see your oh look at I'm doing
really well you you know so you know it
depends on the ratio this is why we
built the ratio so patients can know
everybody ask can I eat this can I eat
that I said what's your ratio oh I'm up
near 12 you can't eat
that all right so yes for one more
question no I yeah right
I guess consensus is that cancer is more
prevalent in our society today rather
than four or 500 years ago with the
death rate well in child birth and what
have you can is there a correlation
between periodic fasting because I know
that in medieval days this was a very
common occurrence for people to go on
periodic fast you know whether it was
church related or what what are your
feelings about well I did a very a big
investigation into this IAL to I talked
to the president of the calorie
restriction Society of
America and I asked him how many people
in your organization have
cancer and he and his wife that run this
they run 60 Minutes you know everybody
sits around they're all like stick thin
they're very thin people and they have a
they have their business meeting they
all sit around and share a grape you
know so
I asked him how he said oh yeah you know
John back in 1978 I think he had some
cancer but they don't have cancer
because they're always under their
mitochondria purin you don't get cancer
unless you damage your mitochondria and
these people under these fasting
conditions that have low glucose and
high ketones they're in that ketotic in
that zone very few people on the planet
can do that all right you got to be like
somebody different I I mean you go into
a pizza shop your knees become weak I
mean you're not going to be doing this
you know you have to know how to balance
this stuff up but there are people that
are extremists like this and they don't
have your answer is right they don't
have cancer all this stuff came when we
changed the Food and Drug Administration
labels in the early 80s and we got all
this high fructose corn syrup into the
food chain and now we're getting infl
body inflammation all these chronic
diseases dementia Parkinson's all this
stuff is all related to the same thing
which is called pre now how do you
prevent prevention is a different issue
I have big section of my book on
prevention nobody care not many people
care about prevention I get cancer what
are you going to do for me now well you
should have done this well I'm not doing
that all right so so now what do you do
it's a whole so it's a whole thing about
looking at this but you can prevent but
you have to kind of change your and and
the food industry doesn't help us we're
not using natural stuff here everything
is like people are on the run all the
time I got to come home let me eat this
stuff eat that you don't have time to
sit down and do all and it's putting
ourselves at risk we're putting
ourselves at risk it's us it's the food
industry and
us and with that let's thank our
speaker thank you